---
title: Algorithmic Social Justice
description: "Can algorithms help to advance social justice and fairer
  decision-making in public services? "
slug: algorithmic-social-justice
image: /uploads/copy-of-cyberguardians_01.svg
---
Can algorithms help to advance social justice and fairer decision-making in public services? How can we more equitably distribute the benefits generated by data access and control?

Not-Equal projects explored questions and mechanisms for democratic accountability in the design and implementation of data-driven public services. Projects focussed on different stakeholders involved in algorithmic services: from policymakers to public institutions commissioning these services, to those who design and develop them, and those who use them. Projects reviewed public engagement practices and mapped out the range of diverse grassroots civic-driven practices; examined government procurement processes of algorithmic services and data governance frameworks; explored design processes that would help developers and start-ups engage with ethical questions related to digital innovations. 

For example, Public Just Algorithms endeavored to provide a comprehensive review of public engagement practices in algorithmic services in the public sector. Their work examined what constitutes best practice in public engagement in this space and showed ways in which those who design and implement these services can be held to account. Data Justice in the Future Generation Act looked at processes of procurement as well as how Data Justice approaches can be adopted by public institutions to reflect social justice principles outlined in the Future Generation Act. Minicode focussed on the design of discursive, reflective processes for those who develop such systems. It delivered a novel DIY approach to support start-ups to engage ethics early in their design processes to help expose some of the fundamental barriers imposed by current economic models, driving new data economies to algorithmic systems that can lead to fairer outcomes.

These projects raise questions around the kind of incentives required for public authorities to deliver effective engagements that can meaningfully shape algorithmic services, and for start-ups to opt for designs that embed alternate value systems from the current dominant neoliberal ones.  Co-designing Blockchain Futures explored how alternate values can re-shape innovations that promote radical inclusion. They experimented with novel ways to include non-human voices in participatory processes governing our food systems in the context of urban gardening efforts. This project looks at the possibilities that digital commons can offer to advance fairer and more inclusive digital economies and ecological sustainment.

Projects such as Covid-19 Info Debt Advice showed the current challenges of developing algorithmic systems interfacing with the law to offer support where legal aid was missing,  highlighting how AI-powered legal advice could lead to significant risk of harm.