---
title: Fairer Futures for Businesses and Workforces
description: What business models offer fairer opportunities & working
  conditions   for all in the platform economy?
slug: fairer-futures-for-businesses-and-workforces
image: /uploads/ne22_challenge_fairfuts_01.svg
---
Can we re-envisage digital technology to offer fresh patterns of processes and systems to realise equitable economic opportunities for all? Who should be part of this envisaging? Not-Equal projects helped map out and better understand how physical and digital infrastructure cities work together to produce new forms of harm for gig workers in the UK and in India. This work also shows that many of these harms are still poorly understood, and the shortcomings of changing merely at digital infrastructure level as a way to respond to issues that workers face. Projects also looked at how workers with intersecting identities, across gender and class, are impacted differently in the platform economy and found novel ways to better understand such impacts.

Other projects experimented with ways to build capacity for resistance in the platform economies, looking at how narratives surrounding gig economy workers could be re-framed and re-appropriated by workers themselves as a first step to consider how platforms could be transformed centring their values, aspirations and needs.  Switch Gigs for example opened participatory spaces to change the narrative around how gig economy workers are viewed in order to imagine different possibilities for socio-technical interventions. Who cares sought to highlight the fact that more than half the gig workers in the UK are women, whose experiences have been largely overlooked, and aimed to identify challenges and opportunities for migrant and BAME women and other vulnerable groups using platforms in the gig economy.